Smart Digital Therapeutics for Alcohol Use Disorder: Algorithms for Prediction and Adaptive Intervention


Context: Personal sensing may enhance the engagement and effectiveness of digital therapeutics for substance use disorders.  In particular, moment-by-moment sensing of relapse risk can be used to both engage the patient and to adapt and time the delivery of messaging, interventions and support from the digital therapeutic.  

We present results from a study designed to develop and evaluate a machine learning model to predict lapses back to alcohol use among patients in recovery from alcohol use disorder.  Following this, we discuss plans to use this model to provide daily, algorithm-guided recommendations to personalize and adapt digital therapeutic use for patients with AUD.

Methods: We enrolled 151 patients in early (1-8 weeks) recovery from moderate to severe alcohol use disorder and followed them for 90 days.  We collected daily ecological momentary assessments, GPS, and cellular communications (phone and text message logs, text message content) using active and passive personal sensing methods on their smartphones.  We used features from these raw signals to train and evaluate machine learning models that provided hour-by-hour predictions of lapse probability in increasingly temporally precise prediction windows (i.e., probability of lapse in the next week, the next day, and the next hour).  

Results: We observed excellent combined sensitivity and specificity across decision thresholds for models predicting lapse probability for held-out observations for all three prediction windows (i.e., areas under the ROC curve > .90 for next week, next day, and next hour).  As expected, positive predictive value decreased as the prediction window became more precise because class imbalance increased (e.g., the true probability of a lapse is lower in the next hour than in the next week).  Nonetheless, precision-recall curves revealed decision thresholds that provide adequate positive predictive value and sensitivity for lapse predictions depending on the intended use.  Feature importance analyses also suggested opportunities for more passive sensing approaches.  

Conclusions:  Temporally precise prediction of future lapses in alcohol use disorder is possible using personal sensing on smartphones.  High levels of sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value are observed for wider prediction windows (e.g., the next week).  However, decision thresholds can be selected to optimize costs and benefits of false positives and false negative to allow use of these predictions for at least day level prediction precision as well.  

Implications:  Real-time personal sensing could be used to adaptively message patients to engage with supports provided by their digital therapeutic when lapse risk is increasing or high.  Risk probability could also be shared with care providers via a clinician dashboard to allow for efficient, top-down allocation of treatment resources.  In the future, these same personal sensing signal may be used to adapt interventions and other supports.
